okay so let's uh continue our discussion
of
series so last time
we proved the comparison test
or the end of last time
so this was a comparison test
so which
is a statement about
series with non-negative terms with one
being smaller than the other
and one of two things
or two things are true
if
i have x in and y and non-negative with
y n bigger than or equal to x in
then the conclusion is if the bigger
series converges
this implies that the smaller series
converges
and the second statement is if
the smaller
series diverges
then
the larger series
diverges
and we also proved not using the
comparison test but
for p series that uh
the series 1
sum from n equals 1 to infinity of 1
over n to the p
this
converges well i mean we did use a
comparison test
for one direction i guess so 1 over n to
the p converges if and only if p is
bigger than one so
this converging implied p has to be
bigger than one by the comparison test
and what we know about
the harmonic series one over n
sum of one over n
okay so
you know typically in applications you
use these two theorems together
to say something about series that don't
look so
simple so for example
um if i look at
the series
1 over n squared plus 20
20 n
n equals
1 to infinity
so one could ask oh does this converge
diverge
well this is a
series with non-negative terms and
remember i mean the bigger thing has to
converge
to give you
to imply that the smaller thing
converges and if the smaller thing
diverges then the bigger thing diverges
so don't get the inequalities mixed up
so
i have
1 over n squared plus 20
in
this 20 20 times n is just making things
bigger on the bottom and therefore
smaller overall so this is less than or
equal to one over n squared
and
since this converges
this implies by the comparison test that
the sum from n equals 1 to infinity of 1
over
n squared plus 20 20
n also
converges
okay
now um
you know a mistake i'm sure we've all
made at some point is mixing up the
inequality
and um
not getting quite
the right answer so for example
it is also true that 1 over n squared
plus 20
20 n is certainly less than or equal to
1 over 20
1 over 20 20 times n which is also less
than or equal to 1 over n
and so you're tempted to say
since this diverges
implies
the other
series diverges
but
this is uh
not right okay because the inequality is
wrong remember if you want to apply the
comparison test
you either have to have a bigger series
which converges
or a smaller series which diverges okay
here we came up with a bigger series
which diverges which gives us no
information at all
okay it's if we have a bigger series
like one over n squared that we know
converges
then do we get information about the
original series
okay
okay so let's do
um let's do another well-known test or
at least
test you should remember from
calculus so-called ratio tests
so what is the statement of this so
suppose
xn does not equal 0
for all n
and this limit
l
equals the limit as n goes to infinity
of x to the n plus 1
over x to the n and absolute value
exists
all right
then
if l is less than 1
this implies that
the series
x n
converges absolutely
and if l
is bigger than one
then the series
diverges
now what about l equals one there's no
information for l equals one
meaning
you could have
a series so that this l equals one
and
you know you could have a series where
it diverges and you could also have a
series where l equals one in the series
converges so for
example um
x n equals
um
one over n
for example
or i mean even worse
let's say one
okay for all in
but we know that the series
one diverges because the individual
terms do not convert to zero they're
just one the whole time
okay
but
for x n equals let's say one over
n squared so the one we just saw a
minute ago
implies l which is the limit as n goes
to infinity
of n plus 1
squared over n squared
equals the limit
as n goes to infinity dividing through
1 plus 1 over n
squared and this equals 1 plus 0
squared equals 1.
okay
so
for this
series
the root or the ratio
uh
gives
this l is one
and this series converges
okay
so
again for the case that l equals one we
have no information we can't say
anything uh based on
on
this theorem gives us no information
so
all right we're going to prove this
theorem um
basically by um
so we're not exactly going to use a
comparison test but we are still going
to compare
this series satisfying
you know one of these two assumptions to
a series we know which is uh namely the
the ratio test for number one so first
off let's get um
let's get number
two out of the way
so let's suppose
l is bigger than one
let alpha
be a number between one
and l
actually we don't even need to do that
so here's
here's one here's l
so since
xn plus 1 over
xn absolute value converges to l
there exists
an integer m0
so it's a natural
number so that
for all n bigger than or equal to m zero
x n plus one over x n
absolute value is bigger than or equal
to so
here
you could write 1 as this is equal to
l plus
say minus
l minus 1.
so think of this as being epsilon in the
definition of convergence
okay
and so
this is over here l plus
l minus 1.
so by the definition of convergence uh
for all n sufficiently large x n plus
one over x n an absolute value has to be
in this interval so it has to be bigger
than or equal to one
okay
which implies that for all
n bigger than or equal to m 0
x n plus 1 is bigger than or equal to
xn
okay
and
so i could write this as saying that x
m0 is less than or equal to x
and 0 plus 1 is less than or equal to
x m0 plus 2
and so on
um
but this implies that
that these x ends cannot converge to
zero
as n goes to infinity because
for all n bigger than or equal to m0
they're increasing
okay
and the only way for an increasing
sequence which is not negative to
converge to zero is for them all to be
nuns for them all to be zero and we're
assuming they're not zero okay
okay
um
okay so that proves two
let's prove one
so
suppose l is now less than one
and
now let
alpha be a number uh
between l and one so i just want to give
myself a little bit of room
to work as you'll see in just a second
so by the same
reasoning as before
so here's
l
alpha
1 alpha i can write
as l
plus
alpha minus l so i should think of this
so think of this as kind of an epsilon
then
since x n plus 1
over x in an absolute value converges to
l
which is less than alpha there exists an
m naught
natural number
so that
while n bigger than or equal to m 0
x n plus 1 over x in an absolute value
is less than or equal to alpha
okay so here i have alpha just a little
bit bigger than l
and if i draw
so this is l
minus
alpha minus l
so since i have um this sequence here
converging to l for all
insufficiently large
this
should be in this interval meaning
this should be less than or equal to
alpha
okay
then for all n bigger than or equal to
m0 so let me just write this uh
slightly differently x
sub n plus 1
is less than or equal to alpha
times the absolute value of x of n
now
let's uh
let's see what this means
for all n bigger than or equal to m sub
zero
let's say i look at the absolute value
of x sub n
so now this n has nothing to do with
these end it's just that
so then the absolute value of x sub n is
less than or equal to
x
so maybe i'm off by
okay so let's let's
increase that by one
well okay so let's not
let's not be confusing here
let's make this
let's make this l
let's make that l
so
for all
l bigger than or equal to m zero plus
one
um so think of l as playing the role of
being n plus one
this is less than or equal to l
x to the l minus one
which is less than or equal to x to the
l minus two
now with a square so
what i have here is now f times alpha
x to the l minus two
and
now let's drop again
by 1 and i can do this
as long as
this quantity here is bigger than or
equal to m
so i get this is
if i keep doing that this is less than
or equal to alpha
to the
l minus m naught
x to the m naught
okay
okay um
and so actually let's
since we shifted things
okay so
all right
now we're going to use this to bound the
partial sums of the x of n
so
let me be a natural number
and if we look at
partial sum sum from n equals 1 to m
of x sub n this is equal to
some n equals 1
to m naught
x n plus
sum from n equals m naught plus 1
to m
x
sub
now let me
just change dummy variables for for
signing for the
indexing this
so this is equal to the sum from n
equals 1 to m naught of
x n
and now
this i'm going to use this inequality
here so
okay this is kind of a mess
so this is the inequality
that i get
from this
remember alpha is less than one
plus
okay so
times
l equals
and not plus 1
to m okay everything's fine
times
alpha to the l minus
m not plus 1. okay so all i did here was
replace
this
absolute value of x to the of x sub l l
is just a dummy variable for indexing
these guys but using this uh inequality
here
all right so sorry i kind of
mess that up a little bit but the
important thing is that we have this
inequality which somehow
tells you this
um series is not that far from being a
geometric series at least when l is big
enough
okay
so then when we take an arbitrary
partial sums we split it up into two
parts uh the stuff that comes up to this
integer m sub zero which we don't care
about that's just a fixed number
plus this
uh part that we care about which is
after
uh this fixed number m0
and we use this inequality to replace
this by x sub m0 plus one alpha to the l
minus m0 plus one okay the thing to
remember is that little m
is the thing that's changing okay so
we're trying to bound this
independent of little m
okay
capital m sub zero that's just something
fixed that could be a thousand all right
so this is equal to sum from n equals 1
to
m 0
x n plus
x sub m0 plus 1.
and now if i change
the variable again so
l starts at m 0 plus 1 and ends at m
so this is now a sum if i go
so now for the second sum
n is equal to l minus m zero
plus one
so now n starts at zero and ends at m
minus uh
0 plus 1
alpha to the n
okay again m is the little is the thing
that's changing here and we're trying to
bound this independently of little m but
now we're in good shape because this
looks like a geometric series
alpha remember is less than one
so
this is less than or equal to sum from n
equals one to m zero
x sub n
plus
x of m 0 plus 1 times
now
instead of just being
a sum from 0 up to m minus m 0 plus 1
why not throw
all of it in there
and this is equal to
n equals 0
x n
plus
x sub m0 plus 1
times
1 over 1 minus alpha remember alpha is a
number that we fixed to be less than one
all right
if you try to do
what we did before and not kind of fix
the alpha just a little bit to the left
of one and try to do everything with one
you would have wound up
with one to the n here and that that
wouldn't have
finished the proof that wouldn't have
closed the proof but giving yourself a
little bit of room which is why we fixed
this alpha
okay now this number here is independent
of little
m that's the whole point okay
so
[Applause]
have we
proven that for all natural numbers
little m
the nth
partial sum
is less than or equal to a fixed number
given by
some from
okay
and therefore
this sequence of partial sums is bounded
and therefore converges
all right so kind of the simplest
application of this is um
maybe a series that
looks familiar so
for all x so this is i guess a theorem
slash example but for all x and r the
series x to the n
over n factorial
n equals zero to infinity
converges absolutely here um
zero factorial is of course one
okay and you just use the the ratio test
right so
of the x to the n plus 1
or the n plus first term over x to the n
so
absolute value
and
this equals the limit as
n goes to infinity of
n plus 1 factorial is equal to n plus 1
times n factorial so this cancels with
that n factorial and i get x
over n
plus 1.
limit as n goes to infinity of just this
fixed number over n plus one equals zero
and this is certainly less than
one
and therefore by the ratio test
this series converges absolutely
so
um
you know
i got a little hung up on exactly uh
the indexes and matching them up uh
precisely but
the important thing to
to take home from this proof was that
when this
ratio is less than one then
this
series behaves very much like um
a geometric series for
as the terms get very as you go far
enough out
in the terms
okay
and
this idea of just
trying to relate the series to a simple
series that you know a lot about name i
mean
basically the only series that you know
everything about
namely even how to sum it
um
this is how you get
you know this test and this is also even
simpler how you get the next test which
is the root test
so it's a root test
let's take a series
and suppose
this l
this limit
l equals the limit as
n goes to infinity
of x sub n to the 1 over n
exists
[Applause]
then
two conclusions just kind of just like
in
ratio tests
if
l is less than one
and this implies that
the series converges
absolutely
and if l is bigger than one
then
this series converges um
no the series diverges
okay and again just like in the ratio
test um no
no information for l equals one
you take the same series that we looked
at before
let's see did i leave it up there yes
so xn x sub n equals 1 for all in
this
limit here l exists it's equal to 1 and
that series diverges
if you look at one over n squared
and i take
this limit
i again get one but that series
converges okay so for
capital l equals one
we get no information
[Applause]
so let's uh
and and in this case
it's even clearer how
you know we're relating
um the series
to a geometric series so
let's
in my notes i proved two first both
times so perhaps i should have written
it one two
um
i'll know for the future
so
suppose l is bigger than one
okay and now we're going to show that
this series diverges again by showing
that the terms do not converge to zero
so
uh
it's the same idea as before
here's l
here's one
so for all n sufficiently large
x to the n to the one over n
has to be inside this
interval and since
x to the n
x sub n to the one over n
converges to l which is bigger than one
this implies there exists
an integer
and zero such that
for all
n bigger than or equal to m 0
x sub n to the 1 over n
is
bigger than 1
which implies
well n bigger than or equal to m0 x sub
n an absolute value
is bigger than by just taking n powers
of both sides is bigger than one
okay
now since all of the absolute values of
x of n's is bigger than one
this implies that this cannot converge
to zero all right
okay
so remember i mean uh
let me remove this absolute value
x sub n cannot converge to zero why i
mean we could
go back to the basic definition of
convergence
of what it means for a sequence to
converge to a real number x
um
and what it doesn't mean or what it
means for it to not converge to x so xn
does not converge to 0 if there exists
a bad epsilon so that x sub n is
outside of that interval
um
as long uh
is outside of that interval
um
if i go far enough out okay
and
we certainly have that here okay
or you know you could use
so
this
bigger than one in fact implies
that
the limb soup
of x of n is bigger than one because if
i have two sequences one bigger than the
other then the limb soup of the bigger
one is bigger than or equal to the limb
soup of the other one which is one
and
you're doing in this week's assignment
that
this converges that xn converges to zero
if and only if the limb soup of the
absolute values of x ends converge to
zero
and um
this is not it's bigger than or equal to
one
so i'll leave that there
okay so now for
the
other case that
l is less than one
suppose l is less than one then
let alpha be
a number between l and one
again since this converges to
uh l which is less than alpha
for all n sufficiently large this has to
be less than alpha
so there exists a integer
i have
x to the n to the 1 over n
is less than
alpha
which implies that
for all n
bigger than or equal to m0
x to the n and absolute value is less
than
alpha to the n okay so here again we're
seeing
um
this series if it satisfies these
hypotheses
is
very much acting like a geometric series
remember alpha is less than one
then for every
natural number little m if we look at
the nth partial sum
of the absolute value
say n equals 1.
this is we split it up again into the
part into a part that we don't really
care about
plus a
interesting part remember little m is
the thing that's changing
this should look like a little m
compared to capital m 0.
and this is less than or equal to sum
from n equals 1 to m 0
x sub n again this is just a fixed
number
plus
now we input this inequality
um
n equals m0
plus 1
m
alpha to the n
and
this is less than or equal to
sum from n equals m zero
um
i'm gonna go
kind of fast here because i'm running
out of space on the board here
um maybe i'll write this out in just a
minute but
why this is true and
this part here is less than or equal to
one over one minus alpha
okay
because what do i do this sum is a
finite sum
and it's certainly bigger than if i
make the lower bound smaller and the
upper bound
larger
and this is just the imp partial sum
corresponding to a geometric series with
non-negative terms the alpha to the n
and so that's less than or equal to sum
from n equals 0 to infinity of alpha to
the n which equals 1 over
1 minus alpha
okay
so that's how we got this term and
therefore the partial sums corresponding
to
the absolute the series with absolute
values is bounded
okay
and therefore
that series
with the absolute values converges and
we have absolute convergence
[Applause]
all right so
now let me state a theorem about
alternating series it is not
i prefer not to call it an alternating
series test
because there's nothing really to test
i mean at least with the ratio and root
test you have to compute a limit
which might require some work to do
and
[Applause]
and therefore at least to me that's kind
of a
real thing that you have to
do a little work
to test whether a series converges
and
for alternating series the test is you
look at it
and that's it
you don't compute anything
you look at it
so i prefer not to call
this theorem about alternating series
and alternating series test
so the theorem is for alternating series
and statement is the following
let x sub n
be a
monotone
decreasing sequence
converging to zero
so because this thing is monotone and
conv monotone decreasing and converging
to zero um
it's all
so let me
put this in parentheses
before xn is bigger than or equal to 0
for all n
i cannot have a monotone decreasing
sequence converging to zero if one of
the x ends is less than zero because
they keep getting smaller
this is uh this is it this is not
this is all of the hypotheses you don't
have to compute anything
then
the series
minus 1 to the n
x n
n equals
let's uh
of course
you know we don't have to start at one
in particular but
at least for this statement let's make
it precise
sum from n equals 1 to infinity of minus
1 to the n x to the n x sub n
converges
all right and we can just say
convergence not necessarily absolute
convergence because again if we look at
minus one to the n one over n which is
one over n is a monotone decreasing
sequence converging to zero that
converges but not absolutely
okay and if we have x sub n equal one
over n squared again one over n squared
is a monotone decreasing sequence
converging to zero that would converge
absolutely so we just have a statement
about convergence
all right
so how we're going to do this
is
we are
it's kind of like how we um proved
convergence for
um
p series in that we're going to show
that a
certain subsequence of partial sums
converges and then we're going to use
that to show
that the full sequence of partial sums
converge okay
all right so
let me state this as claim one
so
the
subsequence
of partial sums s sub 2k
so this is just the sum from n equals 1
to 2k
we're going to show this converges
okay
so again um
just to become
complete s of m this is the nth partial
sum is the sum from n equals 1
to m
okay
all right so how we're going to do this
is we're going to show that this uh
these partial sums are in fact monotone
decreasing
and bounded from below monotone
basically because
these guys are monotone decreasing
and bounded from below
by the same
same reasoning okay
so
let's show that
for k a natural number
if i look at
s 2 k
so this is the sum
n equals 1 2 k
minus 1 to the n
x sub n
now i have the n equals 1 term which i
can write as
minus x so just
writing this out in a certain way so
this is minus x1
plus x2
minus x3 plus
and then n equals 2k is even so then i
get plus x
2k
this is equal to x sub 2 minus x sub 1
plus
x sub 4 minus x sub 3 plus
all the way to
x sub 2 k minus x sub 2 k minus 1.
now
this sequence is monotone decreasing
right so x sub 2
is going to be smaller than x sub 1 all
right
x sub 4 is going to be less than x sub
3.
all right
x sub 2 k
minus x sub 2 k minus 1 is less than
zero so since uh
this is monotone decreasing this is
bigger than or equal to
so
what i just said has nothing to do with
this inequality i'm writing here
yet
so i kept everything here and now i add
uh x
sub
2k plus 2 minus x of
2k plus 1.
okay so what i was saying was that
the x of n's are monotone decreasing
this term is right after this term
so it's smaller
than this term so this term here
is less than or equal to zero
okay
and therefore this thing plus itself
plus something that's negative is less
than or equal to this thing
okay
now what is this thing on the right hand
side this is just uh
[Applause]
x
2 k minus
plus x 2 k minus x 2 k plus 1 plus x sub
k plus 1 and this is the k plus 1
k plus 1 partial sum
all right
thus
this
series
is monotone
decreasing
okay
so to show that this subsequence of
partial sums converges we just have to
show that um this subsequence is bounded
right or bounded below
um
if it's monotone decreasing it's already
bounded
above by something so we just need to
show it's bounded from below
now
for all k a natural number
let's look at s sub 2 k
and group terms slightly differently
okay
so this is equal now to i'm going to
write it as minus x1 plus
x
sub 3
x sub 2 minus x sub 3 plus
x sub 4 minus x sub 5 plus
and so on
plus
x 2 k minus x 2 k minus 1.
okay
i think
ah
no that's not right
okay so this is
minus 2
plus x of
2k all right
okay
now this is right
okay so this is equal to minus so
again the x of n's are monotone
decreasing
all right so
um x sub 3 is smaller than x sub 2 so
this is non-negative
this is also non-negative
because x sub 5 is smaller than x sub 4
so on and so on so this is also
non-negative so
s sub 2 k is bigger than or equal to
minus x sub 1
plus
non-negative terms so
2k and
remember x sub
ends these are monotone decreasing
converging to zero and therefore that
they're all non-negative so this is
bigger than or equal to
minus x sub one
okay
thus
what do we get so
for all natural numbers k
i have minus x1 is less than or equal to
s of 2k and because these are monotone
decreasing this is always less than or
equal to
s
k equals 1.
all right
and this is uh so if you like s sub 2 is
just
minus x sub 1 plus x sub 2.
so
this sequence of numbers is bounded
between this real number and this real
number and therefore it's bounded
and since it's monotone decreasing it
has to have a limit
so s of 2k
converges
let's call this limit something
let's call it s
all right we'll show that
the sequence of partial sums converge to
s now we just showed this for along a
sequence of
along a subsequence of partial sums
let's show it converges to s along the
full sequence
so this is if you like claim two
which is
that
the full sequence of partial sums
converges to s
all right and we're going to do this
by brute force using epsilon m
argument
so remember to show something
a limit
of something equals s means for all
epsilon there exists a capital m so that
for all n bigger than or equal to
capital m s of m minus s an absolute
value is less than epsilon okay so let
epsilon be positive
since s
sub 2k converges to s there exists
an m0 natural number so that
all k bigger than or equal to m0
s of 2k minus s an absolute value is
less than epsilon right
now
we haven't used it all in this proof uh
that the xns really converge to zero we
did use that they were non-negative at
one point
but now this is where we'll use a
conversion zero because
you know here's here's the intuition
the s sub two k's
are converging to something
so now i just kind of have to look at
the odd ones i've shown all the even
partial sums converge to s so
if i can show the odd partial sums also
converge to s then essentially i'm done
what's the difference between an even
partial sum and an odd partial sum
well it's just x to the 2k plus x sub 2k
plus one
which is converging to zero so
um they don't differ by much
and that's essentially um
that's essentially the whole argument
right there
so since
x ends converge to zero
there exists
natural number m sub
one so that for all n bigger than or
equal to m sub 1
x of n is less than
epsilon over 2. i should prevent epsilon
over 2 here
choose m to be
the maximum of two numbers
two m zero plus one
and m one so you'll see why i made these
choices in just a minute
so
suppose m is bigger than or equal to m
we now want to show that s sub m minus s
is less than epsilon in absolute value
so there's two cases if m is even
then
m over 2 is bigger than or equal to
capital m over 2 which is
the max of these if i divide by 2 that's
certainly bigger than or equal to m0
all right and therefore
i use this first inequality s sub m
minus s
which is equal to s 2 times m over 2
minus s now m over 2
is an integer bigger than or equal to m
sub 0.
so i can use this inequality it's less
than epsilon over two which is less than
epsilon
okay
and now
we do odd
so again m is bigger than or equal to
capital m and there's two cases m even
and m odd if m is odd
let k be this integer now since m is odd
m minus one is even divided by two
that's an integer okay
and
so this is
so m
equals 2k
plus 1.
and since m is bigger than or equal to
m0
this implies a couple of things
this implies that this integer so
our m
this implies that
2k plus 1 is bigger than or equal to 2
so m is just equal to two k plus one so
that's bigger than or equal to m which
is bigger than or equal to two m sub
zero plus one
and therefore k
this integer here is bigger than m zero
also
m is bigger than or equal to
m sub 1 as well i mean m is bigger than
or equal to m and m is bigger than or
equal to the max of these two things so
it's bigger than or equal to m1
then if i look at s of m
minus
s this is equal to
s sub m so
the nth partial sum
is equal to the m minus first partial
sum plus
the next term
minus s
okay
now m minus 1 in terms of the integer k
is equal to 2
times k
and now i'm going to take this s
and group it with this guy
and
so since k
is bigger than or equal to m sub 0 we
can use this inequality here
after we do the triangle inequality so
this is less than or equal to s2k minus
s
plus the absolute value of this thing
so again since k is bigger than or equal
to m sub 0 i can use this
inequality
to get this is less than epsilon over 2
plus
this guy and since m is bigger than or
equal to
capital m which is bigger than or equal
to capital m sub 1.
i can use this inequality
and this is less than epsilon
okay so
we've done the case of m even or m odd
and bigger than or equal to m so in
summary
we've shown that if m is bigger than or
equal to m
s of m minus s is less than epsilon and
therefore
the s of n's converge
to s and
i don't think i have enough time to do
this next theorem
so we'll stop there